hey the appeal to nature fallacy is a
concept that gets kicked around a lot on
the internet perhaps especially amongst
people interested in veganism ecology
and animal rights as with many other
phrases that end with the word fallacy
it gets repeated so often that people
forget that the concept itself is not
always fallacious and ad hominem fallacy
at Latin term meaning fallacy of
speaking against the person instead of
against their ideas not all ad hominem
information is fallacious you may have
an argument against a person about their
character about their conduct with the
dunna life which is completely valid and
salient and important to the
conversation you're having if you're
having an election and you're debating
who should who should people vote for ad
hominem material may be really useful
and salient and important and not a
fallacy at all may not be raised in a in
a fallacious way likewise this question
of nature invoking the idea of nature or
the observation of the natural world as
a standard as a referent is not always
fallacious by any means if you have a
captive breeding program for endangered
bird species so you have birds where
there were so few of them left that if
you just leave them in the forest you're
afraid they're gonna disappear or it may
be that there's so little forest left
that the type of habitat they're from
has disappeared that you're taking them
in and you're gonna try to build an
enclosure for them how would you design
that enclosure to be humane strange word
to be appropriate for those birds well a
study of their natural habitat is the
way to do it to say these birds will be
more comfortable in an enclosure that
resembles their natural origins is not
an appeal to nature fallacy it's
completely procedurally correct you're
interested in the temperature the
climate
how much water they'd be exposed to are
they the type of bird that likes to be
next to a pond what type of vegetation
what type of trees yes you would gather
assiduously information about the
natural world and put together a model
for what type of environment they should
live in if you're going to keep these
birds in captivity temporarily or
permanently for this type of reason
since not every use of the concept of
nature is a fallacy and I mean I don't
know it's funny to me
I've Egan's have gotten into this habit
of anytime someone says to you that
eating meat is natural just throwing
back this idea well that's that's an
appeal to nature fallacy you can reflect
in your own lives whether or not that
has ever really been effective for you
if you're talking to someone maybe your
boss at work maybe your boyfriend maybe
your girlfriend maybe your brother I I
really doubt that this will get a
positive reaction or move the
conversation forward in an effective way
to simply snub someone by saying oh no
that's an appeal to nature fallacy even
if it really is an appeal of taste repel
see it may be that they're engaging in
fallacious reasoning and appealing you
know to nature as a standard when it's
not appropriate but I have now had all
of the same excuses from vegans that
meat eaters make for eating need when
vegans want to make excuses for buying a
dog and cutting off its testicles and
then raising it as a house pet where
they think the way the dog lives in
nature is irrelevant and therefore I'm
supposedly guilty of committing an
appeal to nature fallacy by just talking
about how dogs actually live in nature
you know for example the African wild
dog my pointing out that pigs in the
wild do not behave like these pigs
people are now raising as house pets and
there were similar issues you know are
you gonna spay and neuter the pig
are you gonna remove the pigs fangs you
know is this pig is presumably not going
to be allowed to grow tusks and it's not
going to be allowed to go hunting let's
say wild boars actually kill and eat
other large mammals you're not gonna let
the pig kill and eat your dog as an
example which they're quite capable of
doing there are so many absurd
contradictions in this and people talk
about a real fallacy people also send in
the excuse to me of symbiosis of
claiming that their relationship with
their host pet is one of symbiosis I'm
not going to get into the scientific
definition about it okay you think
taking an animal and castrating it so
that it can entertain you so it can be
your your companion and have an
emotional you think that's symbiosis you
look at look at symbiosis in nature you
think it's reasonable to extend the
concept of symbiosis to a human being
spaying or neutering a house pet
depriving it of its natural environment
depriving it of its autonomy in every
way and turning it into a toy into what
you you regard that as symbiosis well
which which one is a worse fallacy when
I am appealing to nature in that
discussion I'm appealing to the concept
of nature in exactly the same way that
we would in designing habitat for birds
in a bird enclosure or for penguins say
in a penguin enclosure you may indeed
have a situation where a specific breed
of penguin it's gonna die or it's been
displaced you need to provide shelter to
keep them alive either before they can
be returned to their habitat or for some
other reason obviously you're gonna want
to really carefully study what is the
diet of the Penguins in nature what
temperature would they be at how can you
provide them with enough time on land
enough time of the water etc etc I mean
there's no not every use of the idea is
fallacious parallel to this also I mean
there is the the appeal to culture
fallacy more often called the appeal to
tradition which comes up a lot
life where people make excuses for
things because something is cultural or
traditional well sometimes that may be
fallacious and again when you're talking
to people face-to-face whether it's your
brother your boss or what have you it's
probably not useful to say to them oh
well that's an appeal to culture fallacy
you know where is that gonna take the
conversation and why would they respect
your opinion and why would that be
convincing I think this is probably more
counterproductive people want to think
it is but the appeal to culture also
it's not always a fallacy if we're
discussing the best way to organize an
art museum culture is significant
culture is relevant culture is a
meaningful standard Akrotiri tradition
is relevant there are all sorts of hype
I know organizing a performance of
Shakespeare whatever culture and
tradition and all those ideas you want
to talk about religion or religion and
politics there are all sorts of contexts
where it's not fallacious to appeal to
these ideas as a standard and finally I
mean probably the most overused fallacy
of them all on the Internet is this idea
that causation causation is not proved
by correlation sorry we normally sit the
other way around that correlation
doesn't show causation and there it's
like well this is true and some people
seem to feel very intelligent powerful
by leaping out to declare that this is
true that correlation is not the same
thing as causation but this tends to be
a sort of meaningless distraction from
the fact that correlation itself is very
meaningful and very important long ago
before I left Toronto we had a scandal
covered in the newspapers about the
correlation between ethnicity and
different types of police arrests and
right away looking at the statistics you
could see there was a very unequal
treatment of black people and this was
actually not at downtown Toronto this is
really the suburbs of Toronto and
especially the highways that connected
the suburb
so was the police were stopping it's
like one especially disproportionate
example was the police stopping cars
with black drivers and checking to see
if the car was stolen where there was no
no other reason to do so now
correlation does not prove causation but
it's still incredibly important it's
true you don't have a cause-and-effect
relationship there between ethnicity and
police behavior but it doesn't matter
the correlation already is really
important it's something you really need
to address the inequality between the
races shown by this correlation is
already something really meaningful
important and we don't even actually
need to get into other causal factors so
though there may be some you know maybe
that when you really look at it well ten
percent of these cases were for this
reason and five percent were for that
reason it's never gonna be a hundred
percent racism but obviously I say the
correlation already is so significant so
likewise we're talking about appeal to
nature
well sometimes nature really is
significant can I keep a pet penguin no
can I keep a pet flamingo a pink
flamingo no I think if you really search
your heart of hearts as a vegan and you
look at how dogs live in the wild how
pigs live in the wild what the life of a
wild boar is like in the forest then you
may be surprised to find that the answer
the question can you keep a pig as a pet
actually is no even though the life of a
pig in your living room as a pet is much
more pleasant than the life of a pig in
a slaughterhouse or on a farm I
understand that same for dogs raising
dogs as pets is obviously nicer to the
dogs and raising them for meat but that
is ultimately a meaningless comparison
the comparison I want you to make that
we all should make is the comparison to
how animals live in the wild finally one
more one more example I want to mention
on this issue of correlation versus
causation um every so often I see social
stitches of this kind of really
misunderstood where there's a
correlation between
art education students who are schooled
in painting and then how much money
there and after they graduate or how
successful they are in university or
other factors that's the case we repeat
many people really do miss understand
they think oh if you teach students how
to draw in paint
it will make them smarter and then
they'll be better at math for that
reason for cause-and-effect reasons now
of course in reality if you understand
social science statistics the type of
students who have access to art
education have all kinds of other social
advantages and the students who are
deprived of art education have other
disadvantages and so on there are all
these other conflating factors now
nevertheless the correlation may still
be meaningful it may still be worth
really thinking about what ways learning
or studying art makes you know students
may be more motivated to do better at
math maybe it's just a nice distraction
maybe students do better at math because
their their education as a whole is less
boring or you know more rewarding or
they're happier overall or something but
you know when you have a correlation
like that students getting art education
to better at math then no we we
definitely do not want to talk about
correlation equating causation but we
still can recognize the correlation
itself as something meaningful so guys
we've all been kicking around this
concept of the appeal to nature fallacy
a little bit too much some voices on
YouTube in particular have really
popularized this as a kind of fast kick
in the pants reputation for meat eaters
which is really kind of shallow and
stupid and self-defeating as opposed to
having a more meaningful engagement with
the people you're debating these issues
about and being open to really
understanding what their misconceptions
are and trying to educate them I mean
you know it works both ways too right
because if vegans people say to us that
eating meat is natural we say no that's
an appeal to nature fallacy well we say
a human being drinking a cow's milk is
unnatural
well then the meat-eaters can say to us
that's an appeal to nature fallacy is it
a fallacy I think it's really meaningful
and worthwhile to say look in nature
mammals feed milk to their own babies
only you know like a cow feeds a baby
calf and humans feed milk to baby humans
and that's it and it's not part of adult
nutrition for really any mammal species
you know dolphins do breast feeding too
you know but human beings do not try to
drink
dolphin milk do not Google that do not
Google that you know so yeah talking
about what's natural and what's
unnatural is not always a fallacy is not
always a logical dead end it doesn't
mean you're stupid it doesn't mean
you're you're asking the wrong questions
all of these questions are worth
exploring with a detached down-to-earth
ultimately open-minded attitude that's
informed by the facts and that's also
you know honest about the extent to
which our own emotions are involved in
this because these decisions are not
purely factual ultimately the sense of
revulsion I have for the dairy industry
it's partly emotional it's partly
irrational it's partly ecological it's
partly economic but we all know it
really comes down to a question of
principle at the end of the day it
begins with ethics
it ends with ethics and most of us go
cut the middle is about ethics so
whether or not you think that the role
of nature is is a fallacy it comes down
to questions of good and evil and
questions of good and evil will never be
strictly logical they'll be about me and
you what kind of man I want to be what
kind of society I want to live in what
kind of world I want this to be for
myself and for my children in the future